In your duties, what was the line of demarcation between the student activities for which you were responsible and the MSC activities for which Wayne?
That was kind of tough and very sensitive because Wayne didn't like it at all.
He was unhappy.
In fact, he told John Colvis that I was too young and I wasn't ready, which I always appreciated.
I always looked at the demarcation as if the group is classified as an MSC committee, it goes to them.
And they had the responsibility with their advisors to do all of that.
And it was my business to stay out of and to try to keep my organizations out of what we called all campus programming.
meaning big name things, with a few exceptions that were already established.
Some of those exceptions were in student government.
I mean, they already had a Mother's Day going, which came from the Corps through Civilian Student Council and so forth.
And they had some big things going that, and I felt like there was that, and also if the MSC wasn't doing it,
that there was then the possibility that my groups could get in and do that, which some of them have come along.
So that was the big demarcation.
And then also, the MSC was doing a big all-university calendar, and I asked John if I could bring that with me because the calendar needed to stay an all-university thing and not be just an MSC calendar.
So we brought that with us and immediately began to put together a student handbook, which we never, we found it.
It was over, Lane Stevenson was doing it, over in that operation.
So the programming was sort of defined by whether it was an all-campus program.
In other words, I would never let MSC get into putting, bringing big-name entertainment in, which Fred McClure wanted to do one time.
He wanted to have a big carnival, and I said, that's MSC stuff.
We need to stay out of their business.
But Mother's Day developed into Parents' Day, which developed into Parents' Weekend, which is one of the biggest programs we have.
The student Y was already doing Fish Camp.
And incidentally, the first time that I worked with Fish Camp, they had one camp with 300 freshmen.
and so that thing just grew and grew and grew and it is kind of an all-university program but it's for freshmen and the student Y kept it for a long time and then it then the fish camp element broke away from fish camp from student Y and became their own program and grew to be six camps with seven camps with with over 4,000 freshmen uh huge program growth there there were some other things that and there were some other things created that I felt were appropriate
to do like um like the big event was started by student government as a as a one-day community activity and that has turned into a huge program and to me it wasn't fair to say okay we have this big university program that student government has perfected now let's take it over the msc so we sort of had things like that that we we agreed to and part of the reason that this works so well is that coldest was really um
a master at making us work together as a team and so there were no surprises that we were going to do big event you know it was like we started talking about this when i found out that student government wanted to create it and what it was so i would come to staff meeting and i would say student government has a new idea for a program that they're gonna they've already got half planned and it is so there were no surprises that when it became six thousand students going out to do something community it it grew along
You know, the information about it grew along with the program.
In those early years with Williams, do you remember anything y'all proposed that got turned down somewhere?
Not that we proposed.
Was he an encourager of the growth of student activities?
Once he got Colas on board, I never heard from him again.
I mean, except for the little thank you notes.
As far as you're aware, he was a delegator to Colas.
Absolutely.
All he did was say, tell me when you want me to be there and make sure that there's a seat for me or, you know, that it's properly done.
And that's all that I really remember.
He was wonderful about coming to things.
how skillful was williams before speaking to a crowd of students and our parents oh he was excellent he just charmed the barnacles off of everybody he was just great very short to the point very down to earth i think that's why people like him so much and always with a smile of his own and creating a smile out there he was a master at speaking
two different audiences.
You know, he was great speaking to students.
He wouldn't have said the same things to students as he said to parents, as he said to faculty, as he said to alumni, you know.
One of the things that I'll add at this point that I didn't realize at that point, and I don't think many of my faculty colleagues did, was that his experiences
from a beginning faculty member teaching Southern history at Clemson College it was then, until he left there as the chief academic officer to come to Texas.
was almost exactly identical to the experiences A&M had during the same years.
They coeducated and made the core non-compulsory a little before we did.
And the Clemson student body and families are quite similar to the A&M student body and families.
And another example is they're off, Clemson is off the main highway,
about 100 miles from the state capitol.
Okay, okay.
Where the state university is located.
Right, right.
And the University of South Carolina people tell Clemson jokes.
Well, did Williams implement co-education at Clemson or was it done before he got there?
No, he is there when it does happen.
Okay, because, you know, I thought he was, I don't think he could have ever done that here.
I think Rudder was the only person in the world that could have done that.
But having it done, then Jack Williams was the perfect person to come in and say, okay, we're done that with that.
Now we're going on to academic endeavors.
And by the way, we got a lot of stuff that needs to be done for students.
I don't know whether he understood.
I mean, of course, I come from this and I'm biased, but I don't know if he understood how important it was to put in the Division of Student Services here when he did.
Because to me, we had moved into an age where students could find great academics almost anywhere, not almost anywhere, but at wherever they looked and wanted, they could find great academics.
But to find those experiences that mended, melded so beautiful with those, I mean, it wasn't like I have to go here or I want to go there.
It's like I'm going to go to a place that has both.
And I think that the experiences that those students had had up to that point and then after that, they went back and they said, man, you know, we got it all at A&M.
And to me, that's how students, 99% of them, chose to play where they wanted to go anywhere, was where they heard good things from other people about that school.
In those early years for you in this new task, who were some of the key student leaders that you remember with joy and pride?
in your earliest years?
Oh, goodness.
Um, there was a young man by the name of, of Darbyshire, Dick Darbyshire, Dan, excuse me, Dan Darbyshire, who was one of the SCONA chairs.
Chet Edwards was one of my princes.
Um, uh, I would say that Fred McClure was in the second heap of them.
After I became director of student activities, I'm trying to remember people that preceded him.
Um,
Harry Lesser was another SCONA chair.
Remember Barbara Sears?
I remember Barbara Sears very well.
She came back to one of the student government reunions last year.
She was the first student body, she was the first female student body officer I believe, wasn't she?
Yes, she was.
There were quite a few of them after that.
I mean, after that dam was broken.
Kent Caperton was one of my stars.
Brad Smith was a student body president that I was crazy about.
In fact, it was him that nominated me for the Outstanding Administrator's Award.
Oh, there were so many.
If I had a list I could, you know, to look at, I could say yes, yes, yes.
The other day, about a year ago, I guess, I walked into the College of Science dinner, and there were two of my student leaders there who are now very prosperous alums.
So, you know, I'm still running into them a lot.
Richard Rabel is one that I'm crazy about, and Richard is so interesting.
Do you remember during those early years, do you remember any guidelines which you or anyone else established of activities to stay away from?
Or are there any...
Were there any proposed events or groups that somebody said, uh-uh?
For example... You mean, refused to recognize or refused to have... Or... Or things they should go to or not go to.
Oh, that's right.
No.
All right, what about... We had some, back then, we had some religious organizations that were starting to come in,
And Logan was my religious person, Logan Weston.
And he had some kind of a list that was put out by the National Council of Churches.
And if they weren't on that list, then they shouldn't be recognized.
Of course, we probably couldn't get away from that now.
Well, we opened the door to a lot more groups.
But for the most part, we limited to that.
Shortly after I became director of student activities, the gay students came in for recognition.
And they simply, well, one day they came in to pick up the form, so I had a little bit of forewarning.
And about three days later, they came in to turn them in.
And I called John, and I said, I need to know what to do.
I know there's some legalities to this, and it's very sensitive.
And so he said, simply accept the forms and don't say anything else.
So we accepted their forms, as in, yes, put them on my desk.
Now we will consider them for recognition.
So, of course, after that, we turned them down.
And we turned them down, and we turned them down, and we turned them down.
You used the phrasing, turn them down.
How far up the administrative ladder did that matter go, as far as you're aware?
Was the president... It didn't, no.
I was simply advised that I should not recognize it.
As far as you know, was the president aware of the application?
Oh, yes.
Yes, everybody was aware of the application.
And then it made the newspaper soon, didn't it?
Yes, but...
I felt like it was important that this organization be treated like everyone else.
And so to go to my boss and say, do you want to recognize this group?
Are you going to sign off on it?
It was not appropriate.
But I did seek advice from a lot of people and then decided that, obviously, that they should not be recognized.
Did you get any phone calls, letters, hate mail or anything, one way or the other?
There was a lot of stuff in the battalion, a lot of editorials that we shouldn't, we shouldn't, we shouldn't.
Yeah, I got some advice letters from former students, that kind of thing.
But nothing that was earth shattering.
Who were the chief advocates of recognizing them?
Nobody.
So only the few members, as far as you were aware.
Only those that had the courage to sign their name on the line.
About how many students were there, do you know?
Oh, I'm thinking there were probably five or six.
So it was quite small at first.
It was quite small, and of course...
At that time, everybody was in the closet.
And so how many there were out there that really wanted to do this, I don't know.
But you said anecdotes.
One of the most interesting evenings I've ever spent in my life was shortly after that.
Actually, it was after they kept coming back a few times.
There was a student government meeting, a Senate meeting.
and it was to be discussed that night, whether we should recognize or not, whether they wanted to advise to recognize or not to recognize.
So I went, as I went to all the Senate meetings, and I never said a word at the Senate meeting.
I felt like that was their thing to do, and only if they called on me for some information to help them make a decision did I speak.
So I came and I was listening, but I knew this was going to be a whopper, and of course the battalion was there.
And so they did a few other things and then they launched into business and the speaker came to me and she said, we're gonna do this and I'd like to close the meeting.
Can we do that?
And I said, let's do it.
I don't know if we can or not, but let's do it.
That meant the reporter got kicked out, which was probably the best thing we ever did.
So I found out later that we couldn't have done that, but who cared?
So they closed the meeting.
Everybody left except just the senators and they allowed me to stay.
And everybody had an opinion.
And it was interesting that it was maybe two-thirds don't recognize them and one-third we ought to.
Now this is the Student Senate.
This was the Student Senate, which I was surprised at those stats at that time.
So then the discussion started.
And I mean it went on and on, lots of repetitive, lots of religious stuff, lots of free world, you know, freedom of everything.
It went on and on.
I saw people changing sides.
I mean, it was marvelous.
It was one of the most educational discussions I've ever seen.
People changing sides, one to the other.
People saying, we need to leave politics out of this.
We need to leave religion out of this.
Then it came to a vote.
Finally, they call question voting.
It was 50-50, split right down the middle.
And so the speaker, who was a female at that time, Diane
I'll think of her name in a minute.
She was great.
She broke the tie and voted for recognition.
The bill went to the student body president.
He vetoed it.
So that's how close and how far along.
Do you have any idea when this was?
No.
It was after we moved to the pavilion.
It was probably 80.
No, 84, 85 maybe.
Now, am I not correct that one of the institutions A&M was watching in this was the University of Missouri?
Yes.
Which had had... Had just been through all that.
That's what I thought.
Howdy.
Howdy, howdy.
Oh, hi, Tom.
It has arrived.
I should just skip it.
Talking about the... Recognition of the Gay Student Organization.
Let's see, the name, what did they use, Gay and Lesbian Student, did they call it that, or do you remember?
I think they started with just gay student organizations.
Okay.
It's changed to something else now, gay and lesbian standardization.
And this, from the first request on their part until the approval went on a decade?
Something like that, yeah, yeah.
And we were really, I mean, I had, I again had all their forms on my desk, like almost seven to 10 years later, waiting for this Supreme Court decision.
We were watching the Missouri case.
We were reading whatever we could find on it.
We were listening to our university attorneys.
And then there was a ruling.
And I remember, I think I remember talking with Coldus that day and say, what should I do?
And he said, recognize him.
And at that point, the Board of Regents was on board with all of this.
I think they were the ones that were, they were, you know, at least in my opinion, they were the ones giving directions of don't, don't, don't.
So we recognized it the next day.
It was just like that.
And there was absolutely not a word said about it.
It was the quietest transition I've ever seen.
Now, as far as you were aware, during this eight or ten year period, when the application was on hold, there was no contention by a higher administrator and or board member and or legislator and or governor.
to saying approve it?
Not to my knowledge.
There wasn't to mine either.
Do you remember the students representing the application, do you remember any of them doing anything inappropriate, any threats, any calls, any...
Well, they were feeding me information about the Missouri case.
But did they do anything that... No demonstrations, no hate letters, no vigils at my desk, nothing.
They were very well behaved and very professional about it.
And both young men and young women?
Yes, yes.
As the female enrollment was almost exploding in the late 60s and 70s,
What change did that make in your student activities, leadership life?
Well, everything was immediately filled with both sexes, everything.
And women started running for places in student government.
They started taking leadership positions.
I mean, just immediately things really rolled into where they were very visible, very visibly involved in all kinds of things.
It took a long time to get our first student body president.
So there were two things that were really not, well, three things that were kind of off limits.
One was Yale leader, one was, because MSC had a female president pretty quickly after that.
But of course, Yale leader, student body president, and corps commander.
And it wasn't until Brooke came along, so it took quite a while to get our first student body president.
We had some run, we had,
Back in about 83, 84, 85, we had a young woman, well, prior to that, we had a young woman who came in and put her name down for Yellier.
And she filed for two hours and took her name off.
So apparently the word got out and she got pressured into getting off.
Did she come herself and remove it?
I don't know.
I was not in there.
Well, you go and you file.
Yes, she must have come herself through.
It was the only way that could have happened.
Then, about maybe seven years later, another student came in and she filed and she came to talk to me.
And I strongly encouraged her to run.
and she was running for all the right reasons.
Her father had been a Yale leader, and she was really excited and enthusiastic, and she had that personality.
So I really advised her to stay with us.
I said, you're gonna meet with some controversy, but stay with it.
You have nothing to lose.
And so she did.
She ran, her name was on the ballot, and she did not come in last.
There were probably 15 or 20 names on the ballot, and she came in like fourth or fifth from the bottom, but she did run.
How close has anyone, any female, come to being elected?
There has not been one since that tried to run.
And that was about when?
I want to say mid-80s.
Right, so you're saying 15 years or so there's, right.
Barbara Sears was the first student body officer, I believe.
Yes, she was one of the vice, one of the committee chairs at that time they had.
And I think that's the mid-70s.
Probably.
Tom was assistant to Williams when she was a student.
Kent Caperton was in, so that was early 70s.
I remember Barbara Sears standing on the steps of the Cushing Library where the polls were, where the voting booths were then.
She, with beautiful eyes, she had given special care, she later admitted to me, of her eye makeup that day and her hairdo, and she passed out little cards saying, please vote for Barbara Sears.
She stood on the steps, and as the young men walked up to vote, she would blink her eyes and softly say, would you vote for me?
Well, when I got to the University of Missouri, I discovered that her father is one of the greatest wheat geneticists the world has ever produced.
I didn't know that.
I know she's in genetics now.
Yes, yes.
I think at Michigan State.
Yes, I think so.
Were there other significant elected office leadership breakthroughs for women?
Well, immediately they almost filled the Senate.
Lots of people running for Senate.
I thought the MSC was a real breakthrough.
That was a big organization on campus with lots of money and lots of influence.
And I want to say that Jane, I'm bad about names.
She was, I believe, the first, and that was early on.
That's when I was still in the first programs office.
So that had to be,
late 60s, she was president, so that fell pretty early, or was raised pretty early, I should say.
How did, when the women began to be elected in fairly significant numbers, was there any change in the priorities of various student organizations?
Not that I know of.
I think that many of them joined that organization because they liked what they saw, what was going on, and then they just went into leadership positions.
There were, probably in RHA, there were some changes in priority because then you had your all-female dorms and your all-male dorms, and then their priority was to get them all mixed up and that kind of thing.
So that might have been some.
Okay.
All right.
Bye.
But I don't think so.
I think the women liked what they saw and wanted to be a part of that.
There were some things that came along that were more dominantly female like we had the women's chorus as I mentioned earlier.
We had a dance group.
that did more or less ballet and modern dance, which was started by women and was predominantly for women.
But of course by then there was Title IX, and I was a strict enforcer of Title IX, and said that you will take anyone that applies to this organization, no matter what.
So we had, we always had some that were all male or all female, but it was only because of the kind of organization they were, not because a male or female couldn't get in.
They had to read, I mean, we checked that part of their constitution carefully to make sure that they were open to all students.
All right.
Women in the band.
I know the band didn't report to you directly.
Right.
But can you trace from the student life area, can you trace that story some?
Well...
I think that the students didn't like it, just like the former students didn't like it, but they just got used to the idea.
Same thing with the women in the Corps, lots of discussion in little corner hallways and meetings about, you know, this is crazy, it's not gonna work, and how they're gonna do this.
But for the most part, I think it was,
It wasn't serious discussion, and most of it came after the fact, like it's a done deal, so we're going to have to get with it.
In my interview with Speaker Billy Clayton about his student days, after the mic was turned off, he indicated that he had opposed coeducation when it was being discussed privately, but never said so publicly.
He said it was his first year in the legislature.
I asked him why, and he said, I was afraid that they wouldn't have real school spirit.
Then he asked me very seriously, do the women there today have Aggie spirit?
And I told him that if anything, they might have more spirit than the men.
He then indicated that he was a proud grandfather of three Aggie.
Aggie women.
And I have, in hindsight, have the impression
that that concern was one of the worries of some of the opponents, that they were afraid the school would change drastically from what they thought it should be.
Well, I think you can trace that through the military thing too, that if you weren't in the Corps, you weren't gonna have the spirit that you should have.
And so naturally, all these women were not gonna be in the Corps, and then when there were women in the Corps, they're gonna take the Corps down instead of build the Corps up.
I think,
that the fish camp program has done more for that than anything because the new freshmen come in and they see all of these students all of them looking alike male female all of them is just as excited as the other one and they see no difference in any of this and then of course they find out that that kid over there in shorts with a little bit long hair happens to be the corps commander you know and he can be he can do all this other stuff without a uniform on
And the same thing with the student body president and the same thing with the Yale leaders.
Oh my gosh, we didn't know he was a Yale leader until he put his uniform and did his program up there and then suddenly, wow.
So I think that they see all of these students in a very equal plane when they go to fish camp and they see so many women and so many women in leadership roles because I used to do a program
I would go and take a group of student leaders with me, and it happened to be the presidents of the different groups that would come and talk about how freshmen could get involved in their groups.
And so when it was time for them to speak, if Brooke was a counselor over in Camp D, she would come to my program and do her thing.
Well, the kids probably didn't even know she was student body president until that program.
And so it was a leveler and it was kind of a message early on that you will come to A&M, you will get into things, you will be excited, you will be happy, everybody else is.
You're inferring that you think that inclusiveness
is one of the keys to A&M's school spirit and reality, and I agree with you.
Well, yes, certainly.
And actually, at one of my professional associations, we talked about, went to a couple of programs about inclusiveness, and the statistics were that students who were involved and included and a part of something
were much more likely to remain and graduate than those who weren't.
And it applied to a kid that worked at McDonald's.
It wasn't just the university, but a kid that had a student job or something that they were expected to be there every day, and it was a good experience, and it was fun, and you know, that that was a big factor in whether or not they remained at school.
So, you create a program that has something for everybody, you're bound to catch a lot of those students.
What are the...
In the total experience of an A&M undergraduate, from the time of application for admission through commencement, what are the major inclusive activities that contribute most to Aggie Spirit?
I think meeting students that are in their major.
meeting upperclassmen in their major.
I think bonding with a group of five or more students to make good friends.
I think to do something that has an effect on their self-esteem,
So what are the formal organized activities that contribute most?
Well, I think to join an organization and to become an officer and to be looked at as a leader, to be included in some things like a president's luncheon or a committee to choose the new vice president of the university or that kind of thing.
Those are really esteem-building opportunities.
And there are a lot of them on campus.
It's not that this happens to be for the golden 20, you know.
I think you have hundreds of students doing this.
But what about such activities as Fish Camp and Muster and Bonfire?
Well, these are all leadership positions.
And to gravitate into a leadership position, even if it's a counselor at Fish Camp, and we had 900 counselors at Fish Camp, that is a very esteem-building position.
And it also gives you, suddenly you are a mentor to all these kids and you have extra responsibility.
And I think that has a big impact on where you want to go.
In your years of working with all these students, if we did a profile of the key student leaders, could we identify them as rural or urban, rich or poor?
Could we identify them by their college major?
No.
No way.
I was always amazed.
I mean, in my last year, we had one of the most outstanding kids wandering the student government and just put together a program that was incredible.
And I thought, who is this kid?
I'm sitting in an athletic banquet.
He wins like all honors in diving for the Big 12.
You know, and I'm going, I believe this.
And he's like a 4.0.
You know, and I think, I don't know what his major was, but they come from all directions, and it is amazing.
I mean, we never discounted anything.
But no, you really couldn't, and we still had incredible, I think that, of course, over the last 20 years, we attracted so many more city kids that had so many more opportunities.
We attracted so many more kids whose parents were professionals.
There were books in the house.
There was travel that had been done.
Just the cultural enrichment of our student body changed significantly.
But the students...